                                               SamDSK: Combining Segment Anything Model with
                                             Domain-Specific Knowledge for Semi-Supervised Learning in
                                                            Medical Image Segmentation
                                                 Yizhe Zhang, Tao Zhou, Shuo Wang, Ye Wu, Pengfei Gu, Danny Z. Chen∗
                                                                                        August 29, 2023
arXiv:2308.13759v1 [cs.CV] 26 Aug 2023




                                                                                             Abstract
                                                   The Segment Anything Model (SAM) exhibits a capability to segment a wide array of objects
                                               in natural images, serving as a versatile perceptual tool for various downstream image segmenta-
                                               tion tasks. In contrast, medical image segmentation tasks often rely on domain-specific knowledge
                                               (DSK). In this paper, we propose a novel method that combines the segmentation foundation
                                               model (i.e., SAM) with domain-specific knowledge for reliable utilization of unlabeled images in
                                               building a medical image segmentation model. Our new method is iterative and consists of two
                                               main stages: (1) segmentation model training; (2) expanding the labeled set by using the trained
                                               segmentation model, an unlabeled set, SAM, and domain-specific knowledge. These two stages
                                               are repeated until no more samples are added to the labeled set. A novel optimal-matching-based
                                               method is developed for combining the SAM-generated segmentation proposals and pixel-level and
                                               image-level DSK for constructing annotations of unlabeled images in the iterative stage (2). In
                                               experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method for breast cancer segmenta-
                                               tion in ultrasound images, polyp segmentation in endoscopic images, and skin lesion segmentation
                                               in dermoscopic images. Our work initiates a new direction of semi-supervised learning for medical
                                               image segmentation: the segmentation foundation model can be harnessed as a valuable tool for
                                               label-efficient segmentation learning in medical image segmentation.


                                         1     Introduction
                                         Segmentation foundational models, such as the Segment Anything Model (SAM) [13], have opened up
                                         new opportunities in medical image segmentation studies. Many recent endeavors have focused on fine-
                                         tuning and adapting SAM for medical image segmentation tasks. In cases where SAM generates high-
                                         quality segmentation proposals for medical image segmentation datasets, domain-specific knowledge
                                         can be integrated with SAM to annotate unlabeled images. This approach can be beneficial and
                                         enhance medical image segmentation, especially in scenarios where plentiful unlabeled images are
                                         accessible while manually annotated images are scarce.
                                             Leveraging unlabeled samples in training medical image segmentation models is a semi-supervised
                                         learning (SSL) problem, and has been extensively studied in the last decade. Zhang et al. [31] proposed
                                         to use adversarial training when using unlabeled samples. Adversarial training encourages a segmen-
                                         tation model to produce outputs for unlabeled samples that are indistinguishable from outputs for
                                         labeled samples in segmentation quality. Peiris et al. [17] added multi-view segmentation components
                                         to the adversarial training framework. Recently, Wang et al. [25] proposed to incorporate anatomical
                                         constraints such as connectivity, convexity, and symmetry in adversarial training for learning from
                                         unlabeled images. Luo et al. [15] combined a consistency criterion with adversarial training for semi-
                                         supervised learning of medical image segmentation models. Designing losses and network structures
                                         that enhance segmentation consistencies is another widely used approach for semi-supervised learning
                                            ∗ Y. Zhang, T. Zhou, and Y. Wu are with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of

                                         Science and Technology, Nanjing, China. S. Wang is with the Digital Medical Research Center, School of Basic Medical
                                         Sciences, Fudan University, and Shanghai Key Laboratory of MICCAI, Shanghai, China. P. Gu and D. Chen are with
                                         the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA.
                                         E-mail: yizhe.zhang.cs@gmail.com, dchen@nd.edu



                                                                                                  1
Figure 1: A high-level comparison between a conventional approach (left) and our proposed SamDSK
(right) for semi-supervised learning (SSL) in medical image segmentation.


in medical image segmentation [27]. Another track of research for semi-supervised learning is based on
pseudo-labels. Introduced in [14], pseudo-label techniques have been widely utilized for semi-supervised
learning in medical image segmentation (e.g., [19]).
    Adversarial training for semi-supervised learning is typically built on the assumption that the un-
labeled samples are drawn from the same distribution of the labeled samples. The effectiveness of the
min-max optimization in improving the segmentation quality depends on factors such as the architec-
ture of the discriminator, the initial model parameters, the distribution changes (if any) between the
unlabeled and labeled samples. Contrastive learning has shown great performance in representation
learning, but, its effectiveness depends on the design of pre-tasks and the training process. Similarly,
consistency loss requires identifying correct notation of consistency between unlabeled images and
multiple views of the images. Incorrect or inappropriate design of the constrastive loss and consistency
loss could make the learning ineffective and sometimes even harmful to the segmentation performance.
Pseudo-label (PL) based techniques are often a go-to approach for utilizing unlabeled images in train-
ing a prediction model (e.g., classification model, segmentation model). Despite its effectiveness, if a
large portion of the pseudo-labels is incorrect, then using PLs to train the model would suffer the risk
of lower performance.
    Previous work of semi-supervised learning commonly concentrated on network training and archi-
tecture design, but fewer attempts were made on constructing and expanding the (labeled) training set.
In this paper, we cast the task of utilizing unlabeled images in training a medical image segmentation
model as an iterative and gradual process of annotation acquisition of unlabeled images together with
model training (and re-training). Both the training set and segmentation model evolve during the
learning process. We develop a novel method that combines the emerging SAM with Domain-Specific
Knowledge (DSK) for annotation acquisition and labeled set expansion. More specifically, suppose a
labeled image set is initially given to our method. We train an initial medical image segmentation
model using the labeled images. We then apply the trained model to the unlabeled images and ob-
tain segmentation probability maps for all the unlabeled images. We refer to these maps as pixel-level
domain-specific knowledge (pixel-level DSK). We further introduce a high-level DSK called image-level
DSK, which includes prior knowledge of the segmentation task, such as the potential number of RoIs
(Regions of Interests) for each segmentation class in an image. For an unlabeled image, an optimization
process is performed to construct its segmentation annotation by matching the segmentation proposals
(generated by SAM) with the pixel-level DSK, constrained by the image-level DSK. Unlabeled images
with segmentation annotations attained by the above matching process are then examined according to
the optimal matching scores, and those images (with the constructed annotations) with high matching
scores will be added to the labeled set as machine-labeled samples for the next round of segmentation
model training. The segmentation model receives a further improvement in each round of training
since more labeled data become available, and through multiple rounds of such annotation acquisition
and model training/retraining, we expect more unlabeled samples with high-quality segmentation to
be added to the labeled set, and thus a better medical image segmentation model will be obtained. A



                                                   2
Figure 2: The main steps of our proposed SamDSK method. Step-0 to step-4 are repeated iteratively
until a certain criterion is met (e.g., no more samples are added to the labeled set). Step-0 may need
to run only once if SAM remains unchanged during the process.


high-level overview of our proposed method is illustrated in Fig. 1.
   In summary, the main contributions of this work are four-fold:

    • We propose a schematic shift of utilizing unlabeled images in training a medical image segmen-
      tation model. Our proposition is that once unlabeled data can be “transformed” into labeled
      data, the training of the segmentation model becomes similar to the model that is trained under
      the fully supervised learning setup.
    • We develop a novel optimization-based method that combines the segmentation foundation model
      (SAM) with domain-specific knowledge (DSK) for semi-supervised learning in medical image
      segmentation. Our approach integrates the strengths of SAM and pseudo-label based learning,
      enhancing the controllability and reliability of the process of utilizing unlabeled images to train
      a segmentation model.
    • Given that many medical image segmentation tasks involve and benefit from image-level domain-
      specific knowledge, we extend our method by developing an image-level DSK within the optimiza-
      tion process. More specifically, we directly apply and utilize the count of regions of interest in
      our proposed method, aiming to regularize the process of constructing annotations for unlabeled
      images.
    • Analyses and experiments confirm the effectiveness of our proposed method. We also illustrate
      and discuss current limitations and future research directions for utilizing SAM to leverage un-
      labeled images in medical image segmentation.



2     Related Work
2.1    Pseudo-labels
Our proposed SamDSK uses probability maps generated by a medical image segmentation network for
unlabeled images. Although probability maps are not exactly taken as labels or pseudo-labels, these
maps are often referred to as “soft” pseudo-labels. Hence, below we give a review of the methods that
use pseudo-labels for semi-supervised learning in medical image segmentation.
    Wu et al. [27] proposed Mutual Consistency Learning (MCL) for utilizing unlabeled samples in
segmentation model training. MCL creates multiple decoders which all share one encoder for gener-
ating segmentations. Because of the random initialization, these decoders generate possibly different


                                                    3
segmentation predictions, and the differences between these predictions are used to compute predic-
tion uncertainties. In addition, mutual learning [30] is performed during model training to enforce
the output from each decoder to be close (consistent) to the pseudo-labels generated by the other de-
coders. At the end of the training, only one decoder is used for model deployment. Since pseudo-labels
inherently contain errors, Thompson et al. [23] proposed to use super-pixels to refine pseudo-labels in
semi-supervised learning. The proposed process largely follows the classical approach of using pseudo-
labels for SSL [14], with additional steps which refine pseudo-labels according to super-pixels. The
main motivation of this method is to impose a spatial structure induced from the super-pixels for
regularizing and refining pseudo-labels so that pseudo-labels would yield better quality and benefit the
subsequent segmentation model training. Seibold et al. [20] proposed to use reference images (with
annotations) for generating pseudo-labels. This approach works for medical image segmentation tasks
with well-defined and stable object structures (e.g., chest radiographic anatomy segmentation). For
tasks under more dynamic scenes where objects can be at arbitrary locations and with large variations
of shapes (e.g., polyp segmentation in endoscopic images), reference-based pseudo-label generation
could become less reliable and effective. Recently, Basak et al. [4] proposed to utilize pseudo-labels in
conjunction with contrastive learning.
    Our proposed method utilizes probability maps generated by a task-specific medical image segmen-
tation model. Similar to [23], we employ an external component (i.e., SAM in our case) to work with
the medical image segmentation model. Instead of refining pseudo-labels using super-pixels, we aim to
use DSK to match and select SAM-generated segmentation proposals and construct segmentations for
unlabeled images for model re-training. Comparing to the super-pixel based methods, SAM is a much
more advanced model and using SAM allows us to design a more controllable optimization process
(e.g, multiple rounds of optimal matching) in the usage of domain-specific knowledge both at the pixel
level and image level for generating segmentations of unlabeled images.

2.2    SAM for Medical Image Segmentation
Since the introduction of the Segment Anything Model (SAM), there has been a wave of attempts
to develop a more accurate and robust medical image segmentation system with the utilization of
SAM [11, 32, 16, 26, 28, 18]. Recent work has shown that SAM alone, without further fine-tuning
and/or adaptation, often delivers unsatisfactory results for medical image segmentation tasks [11, 32].
To utilize SAM more effectively, Ma et al. [16] proposed to fine-tune SAM using labeled images. Wu et
al. [26] proposed to add additional layers to adapt SAM for a medical image segmentation task. Our
work aims at using SAM for semi-supervised learning of a medical image segmentation model.

2.3    SAM and Pseudo-labels
Recently, Chen et al. [7] proposed to use SAM to refine pseudo-labels in weakly-supervised learning.
SAM is employed in three places: (1) refining CAM-generated attention maps, (2) refining segmenta-
tion generated by post-processing, and (3) refining segmentations generated by a segmentation model
(DeepLab). In this paper, we utilize probability maps as pixel-level DSK for selecting segmentation
proposals produced by SAM. To make the selection more reliable, we further employ an image-level
DSK (e.g., the potential number of regions of interests) during the selection process to constrain the
optimization process as a way of realizing the idea of combining SAM with domain-specific knowledge
(at both the pixel level and image level).


3     Methodology
The input to our SamDSK model consists of four components: a labeled image set D = {(x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ), . . . , (xn , yn )},
an unlabeled image set U = {u1 , u2 , . . . , um }, Segment Anything Model SAM, and a medical image
segmentation model M with an encoder initialized using ImageNet [9] pre-trained weights and a de-
coder initialized randomly. SamDSK performs five main steps (step-0 to step-4). An overview of the
five steps and their relations are illustrated in Fig. 2. In Sections 3.2, 3.3, and 3.4, we describe the key
step (step-3) for generating annotations of unlabeled images. In Section 3.5, we present the process of
segmentation model training using both human-labeled and machine-labeled images. In Section 3.6,



                                                       4
Figure 3: Matching segmentation proposals generated by SAM with pixel-level DSK generated by the
current trained segmentation model. The matching is constrained by additional image-level DSK, i.e.,
potential counts of RoIs. Green arrows mark the obtained solution.


we analyze the dynamics of our proposed multi-round SSL method. Finally, in Section 3.7, we give
discussions of several medical image segmentation tasks that SamDSK is applicable to.

3.1     Applying SAM to Unlabeled Medical Images
Given a set U of unlabeled medical images, we apply the state-of-the-art SAM to these images to
obtain segmentation proposals in each image. A key consideration in this step is to use relatively lower
threshold settings in SAM to ensure the inclusion of all potential Regions of Interest (RoIs) in the
generated segmentation proposals. By default, we use the following parameter values when employing
SAM: “crop nms threshold = 0.5, box nms thresh = 0.5, pred iou thresh = 0.5, stability score thresh
= 0.5”. With the ongoing development of the segmentation foundation model, future SAM variants
are expected to provide improved coverage of RoIs for various medical image segmentation tasks.

3.2     Matching Segmentation Proposals with Pixel-level DSK
Suppose we already train a segmentation model M using the currently available labeled data. Also,
suppose for an unlabeled image u with width w and height h, SAM provides a set of K segmentation
proposals, S = {s1 , s2 , . . . , sK }, where si ∈ {0, 1}h×w for i = 1, 2, . . . , K. The segmentation model
M gives C distinct probability maps {p1 , p2 , . . . , pC }, where pc ∈ Rh×w for c = 1, 2, . . . , C. C is the
number of classes in the segmentation task. The background class is taken always as the class C. For
each class c ∈ {1, 2, . . . , C}, we create a set of binary scalar indicators, Zc = {zc,1 , zc,2 , . . . , zc,K }, where
zc,k ∈ {0, 1} for k = 1, 2, . . . , K. Each indicator zc,k is multiplied with the corresponding segmentation
proposal sk in constructing the segmentation map for class c. We aim to find an optimal configuration
of z1,1 , z1,2 , . . . , zC,K which maximizes the total sum of IoU scores between the segmentation proposals
and the segmentation probability maps, as:
                                                                         C−1
                                                                         X                    K
                                                                                              X
                           ∗              ∗
                          z1,1 , . . . , zC,K =       argmax                   IoU(pc , τ (         zc,k sk )),     (1)
                                                  z1,1 ,z1,2 ,...,zC,K
                                                                         c=1                  k=1

                                       C−1
                                       X
                               s.t.,         zc,k ≤ 1,
                                       c=1
                                                                                                                    (2)
                                   zc,k ∈ {0, 1}, c = 1, 2, . . . , C, k = 1, 2, . . . , K,
where τ (·) converts all values which are larger than 1 to 1, and IoU(·, ·) computes the Intersection
over Union score between a probability map and a segmentation proposal. The constraints in Eq. (2)



                                                                  5
Figure 4: Image examples of polyp segmentation ((a) and (b)), skin lesion segmentation ((c) and (d)),
and breast cancer segmentation ((e) and (f)). Row 1: raw images. Row 2: ground truth annotations.
Row 3: Boundary maps of the SAM-generated segmentation proposals.


ensure that each segmentation proposal can be assigned to only one class label. Note that there can
be segmentation proposals not being selected in forming the optimal matching.
   In Fig. 3, we provide a high-level illustration of the mechanism that we use for this optimal matching
formulation. The optimization problem in Eq. (1) (with the constraints in Eq. (2)) is a maximum
bipartite matching problem which can be efficiently solved in polynomial time [3].

3.3    Incorporating Image-level DSK
In this section, we aim to improve the effectiveness and reliability of the above proposed segmentation
annotation construction by adding image-level DSK as new constraints to the optimal matching for-
mulation. Suppose the number of RoIs for an image of a given medical image segmentation task ranges
from vclower to vcupper for class c. We add these constraints to Eq. (2). The optimization objective
remains unchanged, but the constraints are updated with additional constraints imposed by vclower
and vcupper . Formally, we aim to optimize the objective in Eq. (1), with the following constraints:
                                  C−1
                                  X
                          s.t.,         zc,k ≤ 1,
                                  c=1
                                            K
                                            X                                                        (3)
                              vclower ≤           zc,k ≤ vcupper , c ∈ {1, 2, . . . , C − 1},
                                            k=1
                              zc,k ∈ {0, 1}, c = 1, 2, . . . , C, k = 1, 2, . . . , K.

    In each round of the model training and labeled set expansion, we control the vclower and vcupper
values to ensure a stable way of gradually including more samples with more RoIs into the labeled set.
For the first round, we can set v lower and v upper as both equal to 1. This indicates that the optimal
matching is only a one-to-one matching between the segmentation proposals and the probability maps.
In the second round, we can set vclower as 1 and vcupper as 2 to allow a two-to-one matching. Depending
on the specific segmentation task, we can use a larger increment of vcupper to allow a more effective
inclusion of unlabeled samples into the labeled set.




                                                            6
3.4    Segmentation Annotation Construction
                            ∗      ∗              ∗
With the identified values z1,1 , z1,2 , . . . , zC,K through optimizing Eq. (1) and Eq. (3), we compute the
overall score β for the image, as follows:
                                            C−1              K
                                        1 X                  X
                                                                ∗
                                   β=           IoU(pc , τ (   zc,k sk )).                                   (4)
                                      C − 1 c=1
                                                               k=1

    A sample with a β score higher than a pre-defined threshold (denoted as β ∗ ; its default value is
0.9) is selected to advance to the next round of segmentation model training. For a selected sample, its
                                           PK      ∗
annotation map is constructed as qc = τ ( k=1 zc,k   sk ), for c = 1, 2, . . . , C − 1. Pixel areas not covered
by any segmentation proposals selected by the optimal matching are considered as belonging to the
background class (class C).

3.5    Segmentation Model Training
Suppose the unlabeled samples with their annotation maps generated by the above optimization pro-
cedure are denoted as Dmachine = {(uj , qj,c )}, for j = 1, 2, . . . , m′ , m′ ≤ m, and c = 1, 2, . . . , C.
The original human-labeled set is denoted as D = {(xi , yi,c )}, for i = 1, 2, . . . , n, c = 1, 2, . . . , C. We
aim to optimize the following objective function with respect to the parameters θ of a medical image
segmentation model M , as:
                                                                     ′
                               X  n
                                C X                         m
                                                          C X
                                                          X
                        argmin(     L(M (xi , yi,c )) + λ     L(M (uj , qj,c ))),                            (5)
                            θ    c=1 i=1                      c=1 j=1

where λ is set as 1 by default. Assuming that the medical image segmentation model M generates
probability maps for each class, the loss function L can take the form of a region-based loss (e.g., Dice
loss), a pixel-level entropy-based loss, or a combination of these two types of losses. A mini-batch based
stochastic gradient descent method (e.g., Adam) can be applied to optimize the loss via updating the
parameters θ of the model M .

3.6    Analyses
The SamDSK method combines SAM-generated segmentation proposals with domain-specific knowl-
edge both at the pixel-level and image-level in order to generate annotations for unlabeled images.
Pixel-level DSK is provided by the segmentation model M trained on the current labeled image set,
and optimal matching is performed with constraints imposed by image-level DSK as well as the base
constraints that only one segmentation proposal can be assigned to one class label. There exist clearly
two cases after the optimal matching process for constructing annotations of the unlabeled images.

   • Case-1: Prediction maps produced by the current segmentation model M match well with a
     subset of the segmentation proposals (generated by SAM). In this scenario, the optimal match-
     ing gives a high β matching score (i.e., higher than β ∗ ), and this image with the constructed
     annotations is added to the labeled image set for the subsequent rounds of segmentation model
     retraining.
   • Case-2: Prediction maps produced by the current segmentation model M do not match well
     with any subsets of the segmentation proposals generated by SAM. In this situation, optimal
     matching gives a low β matching score, and this image is not added to the labeled set for the
     next round of model retraining.

    For simplicity, we use a binary segmentation task to illustrate, and focus on its segmentation
class #1 (the foreground class) to provide the analyses below. The same logic applies to multi-class
segmentation tasks with multiple classes of foreground objects.
    Assumption 1: For an unlabeled image u, there exists a subset of segmentation proposals, Γ1 ,
generated by SAM, such that the union of its elements closely approximates the ground truth of



                                                       7
segmentation class 1 in u.1 More formally, this assumption can be described as:
                                            [
                                     IoU(       s, gt1 ) > 1 − ϵ,                                               (6)
                                                 s∈Γ1

where gt1 represents the ground truth annotation map of class 1 for the image u, and ϵ is a small
positive value (e.g., ϵ = 0.02). It is important to note that we do not have access to the ground truth
annotations of the unlabeled images.
Proposition 1: If an unlabeled image falls into the Case-2 category described above, then its proba-
bility maps generated by the segmentation model M are not closely aligned with their corresponding
ground truth annotation maps.
Proof: For an unlabeled image in Case-2, the optimal matching identifies no subset of the segmentation
proposals that yields a sufficiently high Intersection over Union (IoU) score (e.g., a score higher than
0.9) for the probability map of class 1 (i.e., p1 ) generated by the segmentation model M . Given that Γ1
is a feasible solution attained when seeking an optimal matching, it follows that the union of elements
in Γ1 is not well-matched with the probability map p1 . This can be formally expressed as:
                                                    [
                                            IoU(       s, p1 ) < β ∗ .                                (7)
                                                   s∈Γ1

   Since the union of elements in Γ1 closely approximates the ground truth and p1 is not well aligned
with the union of elements in Γ1 , it follows that p1 is NOT closely aligned with the ground truth
annotation map gt1 . Formally, an upper bound of the Intersection over Union (IoU) between the
ground truth annotation map and the prediction map of class #1 is given by:

                                             IoU(gt1 , p1 ) ≲ β ∗ + ϵ.                                          (8)


     With the above argument, we have demonstrated that the unlabeled samples which are not added
to the labeled set (Case-2) do not yet contain sufficiently accurate annotations (e.g., p1 is not suf-
ficiently accurate with respect to the ground truth). On the other hand, for the unlabeled images
with annotations that are added to the labeled set (Case-1), it is still possible that although their
annotations match well with a subset of the segmentation proposals, denoted as Γ1 , the ground truth
annotation map is actually closer to another subset Γ′1 of the segmentation proposals, and Γ1 may or
may not be equal to Γ′1 . Consequently,
                              S             we cannot provide an explicit guarantee on the correctness
of p1 and its corresponding s∈Γ1 s for the samples in Case-1. Nevertheless, in our experiments, we
present empirical evidence to demonstrate that the annotations of samples in Case-1 (those added to
the labeled set) are closer to their corresponding ground truth annotations than those in Case-2.

3.7     Applicable Segmentation Tasks
Medical image segmentation encompasses a multitude of imaging modalities (e.g., MRI, CT, mi-
croscopy), covering a wide range of diverse objects of interest and clinical tasks. SamDSK relies
on SAM to provide segmentation proposals. Therefore, SamDSK is especially applicable to those
medical image segmentation tasks in which the regions of interest can be adequately addressed by seg-
mentation proposals generated by SAM. It is important to note that our optimal matching formulation
allows for the utilization of multiple segmentation proposals to cover one or more regions of interest.
Consequently, SamDSK accommodates segmentation proposals that consist of over-segmented regions
with respect to the regions of interest.
    For illustration, we highlight several specific medical image segmentation tasks for which SamDSK
is well-suited: (1) polyp segmentation in endoscopic images, (2) skin lesion segmentation in dermo-
scopic images, and (3) tumor region segmentation in ultrasound images. Fig. 4 presents visual examples
of these tasks and the corresponding segmentation proposals generated by SAM. We conduct compre-
hensive experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of SamDSK in tackling these segmentation tasks,
as shown in the next section.
   1 SamDSK is not yet ready to be applied to those medical image segmentation tasks for which SAM fails to generate

sufficiently good segmentation proposals.


                                                          8
Table 1: Breast cancer segmentation in ultrasound images (in Dice coefficient). The best results are
marked in bold, and the second best results are underlined. The red color highlights performance
degradation compared to the baseline. The same markings are used in the other tables.
                       Method         Network      Labeled Unlabeled Dice
                       Baseline                                 0%         52.7
                        PL [14]                                            50.8
                    SP-Refine [23]                                         53.2
                                     TransUNet      30%
                       BCP [2]                                 70%         53.7
                       UPS [19]                                            54.3
                   SamDSK (ours)                                          59.4
                       Baseline                                 0%         64.3
                        PL [14]                                            69.5
                    SP-Refine [23]                                         69.7
                                       HSNet        30%
                       BCP [2]                                 70%         64.1
                       UPS [19]                                            70.8
                   SamDSK (ours)                                          73.6




Table 2: Segmentation performances of different methods on five polyp segmentation datasets (in Dice
coefficient).
    Method       Network   Labeled   Unlabeled   CVC-300   CVC-ClinicDB   Kvasir   CVC-ColonDB   ETIS
    Baseline                            0%         82.3        76.2        83.1        63.7      60.2
    PL [14]                                        83.8        77.7        85.1        63.4      63.3
    BCP [2]      PraNet     10%                    83.4        78.3        85.3        65.6      64.3
                                       90%
    UPS [19]                                       84.3        81.7        86.6        62.3      58.2
 SamDSK (ours)                                    89.4        84.4        88.0        67.6       63.5
    Baseline                            0%         85.1        81.7        86.9        66.4      68.9
    PL [14]                                        87.5        84.3        89.6        71.5      72.9
    BCP [2]       HSNet     10%                    85.8        84.9        88.1        68.5      68.3
                                       90%
    UPS [19]                                      88.3        86.3         89.8        72.9      76.7
 SamDSK (ours)                                    88.3         85.2       90.2        76.6       72.7
    Baseline                            0%         89.7        83.2        86.5        63.2      64.7
    PL [14]                                        90.8       86.7         88.3        68.5      61.1
    BCP [2]      PraNet     30%                    88.3        84.3       89.1         69.0      69.7
                                       70%
    UPS [19]                                       87.8        84.2        87.1        64.8      58.3
 SamDSK (ours)                                    91.7         85.2        87.6       71.4       67.4
    Baseline                            0%         87.1        86.5        90.9        74.9      76.4
    PL [14]                                        87.8        88.9        91.2        77.3      76.9
    BCP [2]       HSNet     30%                    88.3        88.4        90.9        75.5      74.0
                                       70%
    UPS [19]                                       87.6        89.4        91.8        77.8      78.5
 SamDSK (ours)                                    88.9        89.6        92.0        79.8       77.5




          Table 3: Skin lesion segmentation on the ISIC 2018 dataset (in Dice coefficient).
                        Method         Network Labeled Unlabeled Dice
                         Baseline                              0%        86.1
                         PL [14]                                         87.3
                      SP-Refine [23]   PraNet       10%                  87.2
                                                               90%
                         BCP [2]                                         87.5
                     SamDSK (ours)                                       88.1
                         Baseline                              0%        86.5
                         PL [14]                                         87.7
                      SP-Refine [23]    HSNet       10%                  88.2
                                                               90%
                         BCP [2]                                         88.4
                     SamDSK (ours)                                       89.9



                                                  9
Figure 5: Mean IoU (mIoU) of segmentation predictions and ground truth annotations for selected
samples. The β score (in Eq. (4)) enables SamDSK to select samples with higher segmentation quality
(higher mIoU) compared to samples selected by using the model’s own uncertainty and confidence
measures (as conducted in UPS [19]).


4      Experiments
We utilize three public datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed SamDSK method. We
compare SamDSK with several classical methods as well as state-of-the-art methods: (1) Pseudo-labels
(PL) [14]; (2) SP-Refine [23]: utilizing superpixels for refining pseudo-annotations; (3) Bidirectional
Copy-Paste (BCP) [2]; (4) Uncertainty-aware Pseudo-label Selection (UPS) [19]: a multi-round SSL
method based on uncertainty-aware pseudo-label selection.
    In addition to comparing with the known methods, we conduct ablation and additional studies
to validate the effectiveness of the key components in SamDSK. In Section 4.4.1, we validate the
effectiveness of utilizing SAM for sample selection. In Section 4.4.2, we validate the effectiveness of
multi-round SSL with SAM. In Section 4.4.3, we demonstrate empirical coverage of the SAM-generated
segmentation proposals with respect to ground truth annotations.

4.1      Breast Cancer Segmentation in Ultrasound Images
We first utilize the breast cancer segmentation task in ultrasound images [1] to validate the effectiveness
of our proposed SamDSK. This task is a binary segmentation problem of segmenting breast cancer
regions in ultrasound images. We randomly split the original dataset into two equally-sized sets, one
set for model training and the other set for testing. In the training set, we randomly select 30%
of samples and treat them as labeled images, and treat the remaining 70% of samples as unlabeled
images.2 Two state-of-the-art medical image segmentation models, TransUNet [6] and HSNet [29], are
taken as the segmentation model M for the experiments. We perform SamDSK for three rounds of
processing (step-0 to step-4 as illustrated in Fig. 2 are one round of processing). For Eq. (3), both
v1lower and v1upper are set as 1. In Table 1, the results show that SamDSK outperforms the state-of-the-
    2 All the data split information will be published together with the code release.




                                                            10
Figure 6: Ground truth annotations and segmentation predictions after dimensionality reduction
(PCA). The segmentation predictions for samples in Case-1 are closer to the ground truth anno-
tations than those in Case-2. Top row: samples of the polyp segmentation dataset. Bottom row:
samples of the skin lesion segmentation dataset.


art methods for SSL. SamDSK yields considerably better segmentation performance than the closely
related BPC method, indicating that SAM plays a critical role in sample selection and annotation
construction of unlabeled images. In addition, the results show that the PL method may degrade the
segmentation performance (see the TransUNet case) when the initial segmentation model incurs too
many errors in pseudo-labels.

4.2    Polyp Segmentation in Endoscopic Images
Automatic polyp segmentation in endoscopic images can help improve the efficiency and accuracy of
clinical screenings and tests for gastrointestinal diseases. Many deep learning (DL) based methods
have been proposed for robust and automatic segmentation of polyps. Here, we utilize the SOTA
polyp segmentation model HSNet [29] and the widely-used polyp segmentation model PraNet [10] for
evaluating our proposed SamDSK method. HSNet uses the PVT backbone (Transformer-based) and
PraNet uses the Res2Net backbone (CNN-based). We perform SamDSK for three rounds of processing.
For Eq. (3), v1lower is set as 1, 1, and 1 for the first, second, and third rounds, respectively, and v1upper
is set as 1, 2, and 3 for the first, second, and third rounds, respectively (the polyp class is set as class
1). That is, the constraints on the number of RoIs for the polyp class are gradually changed when
we perform more rounds of model training and labeled set expansion, and we allow an increase in
the number of segmentation proposals for the foreground-class segmentation. Following the data split
settings in [10, 32], 900 images from Kvasir [12] and 550 images from CVC-ClinicDB [5] are randomly
selected to form the training set. The remaining samples from these two datasets (i.e., Kvasir and
CVC-ClinicDB) and the samples from CVC-ColonDB [22], ETIS [21], and CVC-300 [24] form the test
set.
    The results are reported in Table 2, which show that SamDSK improves the segmentation per-
formances of the HSNet and PraNet models for the settings where 10% and 30% of the total labeled
samples from the training set are available. Compared to the classical pseudo-label method [14] and
the recently proposed methods, SamDSK achieves similar or better segmentation performances. No-
tably, we observe that SamDSK is stable and reliable in providing segmentation improvement, while
some of the known methods can encounter situations where worse segmentation performances might
be yielded in some cases.

4.3    Skin Lesion Segmentation in Dermoscopic Images
The ISIC 2018 skin lesion segmentation dataset [8] contains 2594 training dermoscopic images and
1000 test images for melanoma segmentation. Once again, we employ HSNet and PraNet for the


                                                     11
Figure 7: Segmentation performances (in Dice coefficient) across different rounds of processing in
SamDSK.


experiments. We are aware that the image-level DSK for skin lesion segmentation in most of these
images is that they contain only one region of interest. Consequently, we set v1lower to 1 and v1upper
to 1 in Eq. (3) (the melanoma class is designated as class 1) throughout all the rounds of processing.
The results in Table 3 demonstrate that SamDSK enhances the segmentation performances of the
state-of-the-art models when utilizing 10% of the total labeled samples. SamDSK achieves a higher
performance gain in comparison to the competing methods.

4.4     Ablation and Additional Studies
4.4.1   Effectiveness of Using SAM
A key question that we seek to answer in this section is whether using the β score obtained from optimal
matching actually helps in selecting samples of better segmentation quality. Furthermore, we examine
whether using the model’s own segmentation map uncertainty and confidence serves as a better criterion
for sample selection. In Fig. 5, we show that by using the β score obtained from optimal matching, we
can select samples with significantly better segmentation quality (higher mIoU) than using the model’s
own segmentation map uncertainty and confidence measures. For polyp segmentation, samples with
the top 10% of β scores achieve a 95% mIoU. For skin lesion segmentation, samples with the top 10%
of β scores achieve a 92% mIoU. Additionally, in Fig. 6, we provide visualization plots for ground
truth annotations and segmentation predictions for samples in Case-1 and Case-2, which are identified
after the optimal matching process. We observe that the samples in Case-1 (selected and added to the
labeled set) exhibit a tighter alignment with their corresponding ground truth annotations than the
samples in Case-2 (not yet added to the labeled set).

4.4.2   Effectiveness of Multi-round SSL
In Fig. 7, we show the segmentation performances with respect to the rounds of processing in SamDSK,
along with that of the initial model (the baseline model). It is evident that the model’s performance
is improved through multiple rounds of processing, as more samples are added to the labeled set for
model training/retraining.




                                                  12
4.4.3    Performances of SAM in Generating Segmentation Proposals
For the polyp segmentation task, we apply optimal matching between the segmentation proposals
(generated by SAM) and the ground truth annotations. We use those segmentation proposals identified
by optimal matching to construct segmentation annotation maps for each selected unlabeled sample.
By comparing the generated annotation maps with the ground truths, we find that the segmentation
annotations achieve an 89.1% Dice coefficient. We apply the same procedure to the breast cancer
segmentation dataset, and find that the Dice coefficient is 75.3% for the benign cases and 64.4% for
the malignant cases. These results suggest that SAM performs better on endoscopic images than
on ultrasound images (note that ultrasound images in the breast cancer segmentation dataset are in
grayscale). This is probably due to the fact that SAM was trained using natural scene color images,
which in appearance are closer to endoscopic images than ultrasound images. Additionally, in the
case of ultrasound images, the benign cases consist of objects with more regular shapes and better
contrast around the object boundaries, which may lead SAM to yield better coverage with its generated
segmentation proposals.


5       Conclusions
In this paper, we proposed a new semi-supervised learning method, SamDSK, which utilizes the Seg-
ment Anything Model (SAM) for training a medical image segmentation model. SAM is employed in
our proposed optimal matching system for selecting and refining segmentation predictions of unlabeled
images (obtained from the current trained segmentation model). A multi-round iterative procedure
of model training and labeled set expansion is performed on top of the optimal matching system to
gradually improve the target segmentation model while enlarging the labeled training set. Experiments
on three datasets, compared with several recently developed SSL methods, demonstrated the effective-
ness and advantages of our proposed SamDSK method. Future work may study further expanding the
applicable tasks of SamDSK to other medical imaging modalities and segmentation scenarios.


References
 [1] Walid Al-Dhabyani, Mohammed Gomaa, Hussien Khaled, and Aly Fahmy. Dataset of breast
     ultrasound images. Data in Brief, 28:104863, 2020.
 [2] Yunhao Bai, Duowen Chen, Qingli Li, Wei Shen, and Yan Wang. Bidirectional copy-paste for
     semi-supervised medical image segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
     Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 11514–11524, 2023.
 [3] Jørgen Bang-Jensen and Gregory Gutin. Section 2.3.4: The Bellman-Ford-Moore Algorithm.
     Digraphs: Theory, Algorithms and Applications. Springer-Verlag, London, UK, 2000.
 [4] Hritam Basak and Zhaozheng Yin. Pseudo-label guided contrastive learning for semi-supervised
     medical image segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
     and Pattern Recognition, pages 19786–19797, 2023.
 [5] Jorge Bernal, F Javier Sánchez, Gloria Fernández-Esparrach, Debora Gil, Cristina Rodrı́guez, and
     Fernando Vilariño. WM-DOVA maps for accurate polyp highlighting in colonoscopy: Validation
     vs. saliency maps from physicians. Computerized Medical Imaging and Graphics, 43:99–111, 2015.

 [6] Jieneng Chen, Yongyi Lu, Qihang Yu, Xiangde Luo, Ehsan Adeli, Yan Wang, Le Lu, Alan L Yuille,
     and Yuyin Zhou. TransUNet: Transformers make strong encoders for medical image segmentation.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.04306, 2021.
 [7] Tianle Chen, Zheda Mai, Ruiwen Li, and Wei-lun Chao.           Segment Anything Model
     (SAM) enhanced pseudo labels for weakly supervised semantic segmentation. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2305.05803, 2023.
 [8] Noel Codella, Veronica Rotemberg, Philipp Tschandl, M Emre Celebi, Stephen Dusza, David
     Gutman, Brian Helba, Aadi Kalloo, Konstantinos Liopyris, Michael Marchetti, et al. Skin lesion


                                                  13
    analysis toward melanoma detection 2018: A challenge hosted by the international skin imaging
    collaboration (ISIC). arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.03368, 2019.
 [9] Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A large-scale
     hierarchical image database. In CVPR, pages 248–255, 2009.
[10] Deng-Ping Fan, Ge-Peng Ji, Tao Zhou, Geng Chen, Huazhu Fu, Jianbing Shen, and Ling Shao.
     PraNet: Parallel reverse attention network for polyp segmentation. In International Conference
     on Medical Image Computing and Computer-assisted Intervention, pages 263–273. Springer, 2020.
[11] Yuhao Huang, Xin Yang, Lian Liu, Han Zhou, Ao Chang, Xinrui Zhou, Rusi Chen, Junxuan
     Yu, Jiongquan Chen, Chaoyu Chen, et al. Segment Anything Model for medical images? arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2304.14660, 2023.

[12] Debesh Jha, Pia H Smedsrud, Michael A Riegler, Pål Halvorsen, Thomas de Lange, Dag Johansen,
     and Håvard D Johansen. Kvasir-SEG: A segmented polyp dataset. In MultiMedia Modeling: 26th
     International Conference, Part II, pages 451–462. Springer, 2020.
[13] Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete
     Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2304.02643, 2023.
[14] Dong-Hyun Lee et al. Pseudo-label: The simple and efficient semi-supervised learning method for
     deep neural networks. In Workshop on Challenges in Representation Learning, ICML, volume 3,
     page 896. Atlanta, 2013.

[15] Xiangde Luo, Jieneng Chen, Tao Song, and Guotai Wang. Semi-supervised medical image seg-
     mentation through dual-task consistency. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
     Intelligence, volume 35, pages 8801–8809, 2021.
[16] Jun Ma and Bo Wang. Segment anything in medical images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.12306,
     2023.

[17] Himashi Peiris, Zhaolin Chen, Gary Egan, and Mehrtash Harandi. Duo-SegNet: Adversarial
     dual-views for semi-supervised medical image segmentation. In Medical Image Computing and
     Computer Assisted Intervention–MICCAI 2021: 24th International Conference, Proceedings, Part
     II 24, pages 428–438. Springer, 2021.
[18] Yu Qiao, Chaoning Zhang, Taegoo Kang, Donghun Kim, Shehbaz Tariq, Chenshuang Zhang, and
     Choong Seon Hong. Robustness of SAM: Segment anything under corruptions and beyond. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2306.07713, 2023.
[19] Mamshad Nayeem Rizve, Kevin Duarte, Yogesh S Rawat, and Mubarak Shah. In defense
     of pseudo-labeling: An uncertainty-aware pseudo-label selection framework for semi-supervised
     learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.

[20] Constantin Marc Seibold, Simon Reiß, Jens Kleesiek, and Rainer Stiefelhagen. Reference-guided
     pseudo-label generation for medical semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Confer-
     ence on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pages 2171–2179, 2022.
[21] Juan Silva, Aymeric Histace, Olivier Romain, Xavier Dray, and Bertrand Granado. Toward
     embedded detection of polyps in WCE images for early diagnosis of colorectal cancer. International
     Journal of Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery, 9:283–293, 2014.
[22] Nima Tajbakhsh, Suryakanth R Gurudu, and Jianming Liang. Automated polyp detection in
     colonoscopy videos using shape and context information. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging,
     35(2):630–644, 2015.

[23] Bethany H Thompson, Gaetano Di Caterina, and Jeremy P Voisey. Pseudo-label refinement using
     superpixels for semi-supervised brain tumour segmentation. In 2022 IEEE 19th International
     Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI), pages 1–5. IEEE, 2022.



                                                  14
[24] David Vázquez, Jorge Bernal, F Javier Sánchez, Gloria Fernández-Esparrach, Antonio M López,
     Adriana Romero, Michal Drozdzal, and Aaron Courville. A benchmark for endoluminal scene
     segmentation of colonoscopy images. Journal of Healthcare Engineering, 2017, 2017.
[25] Ping Wang, Jizong Peng, Marco Pedersoli, Yuanfeng Zhou, Caiming Zhang, and Christian
     Desrosiers. CAT: Constrained adversarial training for anatomically-plausible semi-supervised seg-
     mentation. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 2023.
[26] Junde Wu, Rao Fu, Huihui Fang, Yuanpei Liu, Zhaowei Wang, Yanwu Xu, Yueming Jin, and Tal
     Arbel. Medical SAM adapter: Adapting Segment Anything Model for medical image segmenta-
     tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.12620, 2023.
[27] Yicheng Wu, Zongyuan Ge, Donghao Zhang, Minfeng Xu, Lei Zhang, Yong Xia, and Jianfei
     Cai. Mutual consistency learning for semi-supervised medical image segmentation. Medical Image
     Analysis, 81:102530, 2022.
[28] Chaoning Zhang, Sheng Zheng, Chenghao Li, Yu Qiao, Taegoo Kang, Xinru Shan, Chenshuang
     Zhang, Caiyan Qin, Francois Rameau, Sung-Ho Bae, et al. A survey on Segment Anything Model
     (SAM): Vision foundation model meets prompt engineering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.06211,
     2023.
[29] Wenchao Zhang, Chong Fu, Yu Zheng, Fangyuan Zhang, Yanli Zhao, and Chiu-Wing Sham.
     HSNet: A hybrid semantic network for polyp segmentation. Computers in Biology and Medicine,
     150:106173, 2022.
[30] Ying Zhang, Tao Xiang, Timothy M Hospedales, and Huchuan Lu. Deep mutual learning. In
     Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 4320–
     4328, 2018.
[31] Yizhe Zhang, Lin Yang, Jianxu Chen, Maridel Fredericksen, David P Hughes, and Danny Z Chen.
     Deep adversarial networks for biomedical image segmentation utilizing unannotated images. In
     Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention- MICCAI 2017: 20th International
     Conference, Proceedings, Part III 20, pages 408–416. Springer, 2017.
[32] Tao Zhou, Yizhe Zhang, Yi Zhou, Ye Wu, and Chen Gong. Can SAM segment polyps? arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2304.07583, 2023.




                                                 15
