                                        Adapting Segment Anything Model to Melanoma
                                           Segmentation in Microscopy Slide Images

                                                             Qingyuan Liu1     and Avideh Zakhor1

                                                                 University of California, Berkeley
                                                                 {pixelled, avz}@berkeley.edu
arXiv:2410.02207v1 [cs.CV] 3 Oct 2024




                                              Abstract. Melanoma segmentation in Whole Slide Images (WSIs) is
                                              useful for prognosis and the measurement of crucial prognostic factors
                                              such as Breslow depth and primary invasive tumor size. In this paper,
                                              we present a novel approach that uses the Segment Anything Model
                                              (SAM) for automatic melanoma segmentation in microscopy slide im-
                                              ages. Our method employs an initial semantic segmentation model to
                                              generate preliminary segmentation masks that are then used to prompt
                                              SAM. We design a dynamic prompting strategy that uses a combination
                                              of centroid and grid prompts to achieve optimal coverage of the super
                                              high-resolution slide images while maintaining the quality of generated
                                              prompts. To optimize for invasive melanoma segmentation, we further
                                              refine the prompt generation process by implementing in-situ melanoma
                                              detection and low-confidence region filtering. We select Segformer as
                                              the initial segmentation model and EfficientSAM as the segment any-
                                              thing model for parameter-efficient fine-tuning. Our experimental results
                                              demonstrate that this approach not only surpasses other state-of-the-art
                                              melanoma segmentation methods but also significantly outperforms the
                                              baseline Segformer by 9.1% in terms of IoU.

                                              Keywords: Segment Anything Model, Melanoma Segmentation, Whole
                                              Slide Images


                                        1   Introduction
                                        Melanoma, one of the most serious forms of skin cancer, originates in melanocytes,
                                        the pigment-producing cells responsible for melanin production [22]. Based on its
                                        progression and location within the skin, melanoma can be categorized into two
                                        main types: in-situ melanoma and invasive melanoma. While in-situ melanoma
                                        represents cancerous melanocytes that are confined to the epidermis, invasive
                                        melanoma penetrates beyond the epidermis into the dermis, posing a significant
                                        risk of spreading to other vital organs. As invasive melanoma grows, it may in-
                                        vade blood vessels and lymphatic vessels, allowing cancer cells to detach from
                                        the primary tumor and cause metastatic cancer [1]. In this paper, we primarily
                                        focus on segmenting invasive melanoma to assist dermatologists in deciding on
                                        treatment options.
                                            Early detection and accurate diagnosis of melanoma are crucial for improv-
                                        ing the survival rate [3,6]. The standard diagnosis practice begins with an initial
2      Q. Liu et al.

examination of dermatoscopic features to determine the types of melanocyptic
lesions. For suspicious and malignant lesions, a histopathologic analysis of skin
biopsies stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) is required [11]. While tradi-
tional approach requires examination of tissue specimens under a microscope, the
advent of Whole Slide Images (WSIs) has revolutionized this process by digitiz-
ing tissue samples into high resolution images. These digital slide images enable
pathologists to examine various characteristics such as the celluar architecture,
breslow depth and complex histologic features that are crucial for determining
the stage and aggressiveness of melanoma.
    Recent studies [2, 16–18, 21, 24] have focused on utilizing deep learning tech-
nology for melanoma segmentation in whole slide images. Melanoma segmenta-
tion results with sufficient accuracy in slide images have proven highly beneficial
for aiding diagnosis and assisting manual measurement of breslow depth and pri-
mary invasive tumor size, which are crucial prognostic factors. This shows the
potential for a fully automatic diagnosis procedure. Phillips et al. [18] demon-
strated the effectiveness of multi-scale FCN in segmentation the dermis, epider-
mis and tumor in whole slide images. Want et al. [26] utilized more advanced
transformer models including Hiearachical Pyramid Transformers (HIPT) and
Segformers to achieve accurate segmentation of invasive melanoma and the epi-
dermis in microscopy slide images.
    In this paper, we propose a novel method to use the Segment Anything Model
(SAM) [13] for automatic melanoma segmentation in microscopy slide images.
SAM has demonstrated great success in various computer vision tasks and has
achieved state-of-the-art performance in a diverse range of image segmentation
tasks [4, 13, 20]. One of the key features of SAM is a prompt encoder that allows
the model to adapt to diverse downstream segmentation tasks with prompt en-
gineering. Despite SAM’s strong zero-shot generalization abilities, several stud-
ies [8, 12, 19, 32] have shown that its accuracy is limited in segmentation tasks
that require specific domain knowledge. Recent studies [15,27,31] have proposed
methods to adapt SAM for medical image segmentation, such as augmenting
data with SAM’s predictions or fine-tuning SAM for better performance. De-
spite showing impressive performance in segmenting medical images such as CT
and MRI scans, these methods do not generalize well to microscopy images,
especially for melanoma segmentation in microscopy slide images.
    Our proposed method addresses these challenges by introducing an innova-
tive framework that automatically generates prompts from an initial segmenta-
tion maps to guide SAM. We use Segformer, an effective semantic segmentation
model for melanoma segmentation, to generate the initial segmentation map.
We design a dynamic prompt strategy that uses a combination of centroid and
grid prompts. Additionally, we incorporate in-situ melanoma detection and low-
confidence region filtering to ensure precise prompt generation. Our experimental
results demonstrate that this approach not only surpasses other state-of-the-art
melanoma segmentation methods but also significantly improves upon the base-
line performance of Segformer by over 9.1%.
     Adapting SAM to Melanoma Segmentation in Microscopy Slide Images           3

2   Related Work
SAM in Medical Imaging. Given SAM’s impressive results on various nat-
ural image segmentation tasks [4, 13, 20], recent works have explored its appli-
cation to medical image segmentation. However, several studies [8, 12, 19, 32]
have shown that SAM underperforms in medical image segmentation. This is
attributed to the model’s lack of domain-specific medical knowledge, the uncer-
tain and complex object boundaries, intricate structures, and the wide-range of
scales unique to medical objects [12]. Recent efforts have focused on adapting
SAM for medical images, primarily through fine-tuning or adapting SAM to la-
beled medical dataset. Ma et al. [15] proposed to fine-tune SAM fully on labeled
medical data, which is not cost-effective due to the vast number of parameters.
Wu et al. [27] proposed to integrate adapter modules into SAM, allowing effi-
cient fine-tuning by freezing all modules except for the adapters during training.
These studies all focus on utilizing SAM as an interactive model and evaluate
its performance by providing accurate prompts based on the ground-truth an-
notations. For microscopy slide image segmentation, SAM’s interactive feature
can assist annotators but cannot fully automate the labor-intensive process of
segmenting high-resolution whole slide images. Although SAM offers automatic
mask generation, this feature is designed for segmenting everything on an entire
image rather than targeting specific small objects, such as scattered melanoma
cells in microscopy slide images. Zhang et al. [31] proposed to enhance medical
images by adding semantic structures using SAM’s automatic mask generation.
This approach combines generated masks, features and stability scores to help
train other image segmentation models with enhanced data. The success of this
method depends on SAM’s ability to generate useful structural information dur-
ing the automatic mask generation process.
Melanoma Segmentation in Slide Images. Melanoma semantic segmen-
tation can be classified into two categories: 1) skin lesion segmentation based
on images captured at a macroscopic scale; 2) microscopy slide image segmen-
tation that involves WSIs captured at a microscopic scale. While skin lesion
segmentation only segments a large rounded melanoma component at a macro-
scopic level, microscopy slide image segmentation requires segmenting irregular
melanoma scattered across high-resolution, detailed views of tissue samples at
the cellular level, making the task significantly more challenging. Our work fo-
cuses exclusively on the latter.
    Most studies [2, 16–18, 21, 24] focus on utilizing CNN-based methods for
melanoma segmentation in microscopy slide images. Phillips et al. [18] devised
a multi-stride fully convolutional network (FCN) that can effectively segment
tumour, epidermis and dermis. Shah et al. [21] developed a two-stage method to
segment invasive melanoma by leveraging the difference between in-situ melanoma
and invasive melanoma. They used HRNet-OCR [30] and HookNet [23] as back-
bones and trained two models, one for epidermis segmentation and one for tu-
mor segmentation, to predict two separate segmentation masks for epidermis
and melanoma. By removing all predicted melanoma from the epidermis mask,
they obtained segmentation masks for invasive melanoma.
4       Q. Liu et al.




Fig. 1: An overview of the proposed method. The initial mask X generated by Seg-
former is post-processed to generate the mask X̂ m . We run SAM on the prompts
generated from X̂ m to generate the mask Ŷ m . The two masks are combined to create
the final mask Y.



    Recent works have applied transformer-based architectures [25] to melanoma
segmentation. Wang et al. [26] proposed to fine-tune the Hierarchical Pyramid
Transformer (HIPT) [5] and the Segformer [28] for invasive melanoma segmen-
tation in microscopy slide images. Segformer has been shown to outperform all
other CNN-based methods and HIPT in segmenting invasive melanoma, achiev-
ing state-of-the-art IoU [26]. Our method is designed with Segformer [28] as the
initial segmentation model to achieve the best results.


3     Method

3.1   Overview of the Proposed Method

Our proposed method comprises an initial semantic segmentation model and a
segment anything model as illustrated in Fig. 1. To segment invasive melanoma
automatically, we prompt SAM with prompts generated from the mask pro-
duced by the initial segmentation model. To optimize for our task of segment-
ing invasive melanoma, we select Segformer as the initial segmentation model
due to its superior performance compared to other models [26]. We choose Effi-
cientSAM [29] as the segment anything model for parameter-efficient fine-tuning.
The entire framework is described as follows.
    Step 1. Initial Mask Generation. We run Segformer [28] to generate the
initial segmentation mask X. Then we perform in-situ melanoma detection to
separate X into the estimated in-situ melanoma regions X s and the remaining
invasive melanoma regions X v . We filter out low-confidence regions from Xs to
obtain the filtered mask Xcs and combine it with X v to obtain the post-processed
mask X̂ m . The details are described in Secs. 3.2 and 3.3.
    Step 2. Prompt Generation. We generate single point prompts from the
post-processed mask X̂ m . We determine the best prompt type for each connected
      Adapting SAM to Melanoma Segmentation in Microscopy Slide Images             5




             (a) In-situ Melanoma Detection              (b) Low-Confidence
                                                           Region Filtering

Fig. 2: In-situ melanoma detection finds the estimated in-situ melanoma regions X s
from the initial mask X. Low-confidence region filtering discards low-confidence con-
nected components from X s .



component based on its shape distribution and geometric characteristics. The
details of the prompt generation strategy are described in Sec. 3.4.
    Step 3. Final Mask Generation. We run SAM on the generated prompts
to produce its own invasive melanoma mask Ŷ m . We use SAM’s mask to refine
the post-processed mask X̂ m by combining the two masks together. This aims
to enhance the overall accuracy and robustness of melanoma segmentation. The
details are described in Sec. 3.5.


3.2   In-situ Melanoma Detection

We exclude low-confidence invasive melanoma predictions that touch the epi-
dermis, since these are considered to be in-situ melanoma from a medical per-
spective. This process is shown in Fig. 2a. The initial mask X produced by
Segformer contains both the epidermis mask X e , and the invasive melanoma
mask X m . The invasive melanoma mask can be represented       as a union of inva-
sive melanoma connected components (CCs) X m = Xim , where i denotes the
                                                      S
ith invasive melanoma connected    component. Similarly, the mask for epidermis
can be represented as X e = Xje , where j denotes the jth epidermis connected
                              S
component. Since SAM heavily relies on prompts to specify the exact objects to
segment, inaccurate and ambiguous prompts can significantly degrade its per-
formance. This can lead SAM to produce more false positives compared to the
initial segmentation mask from which prompts are generated. Therefore, we fil-
ter out low-confidence invasive melanoma components to improve the accuracy
of prompts so that it is clicked on true positives in most cases.
    To begin with, we iterate over all connected components Xim in the invasive
melanoma mask X m . For each connected component, we determine whether it
touches any epidermis component Xje . If such a touch exists, we compute the
ratio between the area of the melanoma component Xim and the area of the
6      Q. Liu et al.




Fig. 3: Prompt Generation Strategy. We apply the centroid prompt and the grid
prompt to based on the geometric characteristics of each connected component.


touched epidermis region Xje . If this ratio falls below a specified threshold αm ,
we classify it as an estimated in-situ melanoma region, This is because careful
inspection of Segformer’s predictions shows that in-situ melanoma that are mis-
classified as invasive melanoma tend to have a relatively small size compared to
the epidermis. This process results in the estimated in-situ melanoma mask X s
and the remaining invasive melanoma regions X v .

3.3   Low-Confidence Region Filtering
We further filter out low-confidence estimated in-situ melanoma regions from
X s . We keep high-confidence regions even if they touch the epidermis, since
this could result from false predictions in the epidermis that make them touch
each other. We determine the confidence level based on the probability map
generated by Segformer. As shown in Fig. 2b, for each component Xis , we first
                                           s
find its high-confidence sub-component Xi,β   that has a probability exceeding the
defined threshold β:
                           X^s_{i, \beta } = \{x \mid P(x) > \beta , x \in X^s_i\}.    (1)
We then determine the confidence level by computing the ratio between the
          s
area of Xi,β and Xis . If the ratio fails to meet the confidence threshold αc , we
discard this component and do not generate prompts from it. Careful inspec-
tions of Segformer’s mask show that it generally predicts a larger proportion
of low-probability areas for in-situ melanoma compared to invasive melanoma.
Therefore, if we keep only regions with a high proportion of high probability
areas, we can significantly reduce the number of false positives in X m . Next,
we combine the filtered melanoma regions Xcs and the rest invasive melanoma
regions X v to obtain the post-processed invasive melanoma mask X̂ m .

3.4   Prompt Generation
Melanoma can be in various forms in microscopy slide images, ranging from
rounded clusters to jagged streaks or any combination of irregular shapes. To
      Adapting SAM to Melanoma Segmentation in Microscopy Slide Images          7




Algorithm 1 Determine prompt type for a connected component
Require:
    A connected component of invasive melanoma: x
    The length of the side of a patch: s
    The threshold for the ratio between sides of a minimum bounding box: αb
Ensure:
    The generated prompts (a set of single point prompts): P
 1: function GeneratePrompts(x)
 2:    P =∅
 3:    ws , hs = FindAABB(x)
 4:    wm , hm = FindMinAreaBB(x)
                                hm
 5:    if ws > s or hs > s or w  m
                                    > αb then
 6:        Pgrid = GenerateGridPrompts(x)
 7:        P = P ∪ Pgrid
 8:        center = FindCentroid(x)
 9:        if center ∈ x then
10:            P = P ∪ {center}
11:         end if
12:    else
13:         center = FindCentroid(x)
14:         P = P ∪ {center}
15:    end if
16:    return P
17: end function




facilitate accurate segmentation of diverse morphologies, we design two types of
point prompts: centroid and grid. Centroid prompts consist of a single point
placed at the centroid of a connected component. On the other hand, grid
prompts comprise a grid of points distributed within a connected component.
As shown in Fig. 3, we choose a prompt type for each connected component X̂im
and serve each point as a single point prompt for the SAM prompt encoder. We
feed a patch centered at the point to the SAM image encoder, since this ideally
provides maximum context.
    We choose prompts dynamically based on the characteristics of the connected
components. Centroid prompts excel in providing optimal context for small,
regularly shaped melanoma, but often fail to provide sufficient context for those
covering large regions and those with irregular shapes. In cases where a connected
component is too large to fit inside a patch, numerous melanoma predictions are
lost in a centered patch and not enough context is provided for its surroundings.
Furthermore, if the centroid falls outside the component, it turns out to be a
point prompt not clicked on invasive melanoma, resulting in false positives.
8      Q. Liu et al.

     For each connected component X̂im , we determine the prompt type based on
its shape distribution and geometric attributes, as detailed in Algorithm 1. As
shown in Fig. 3, we find the width ws and height hs of an axis aligned bounding
box (AABB). If either dimension exceeds the patch length, we use grid prompts.
Then we find the width wm and height hm of an arbitrarily oriented bounding
box with minimum area and check whether the ratio between hm and wm exceeds
a threshold αb assuming hm is the longer side. A high ratio implies that the shape
of the component resembles a narrow rectangle or any other irregular shape
where one dimension is larger than the other, in which case centroid prompt is
ambiguous for segmenting the whole component. In such cases, we also choose
to use grid prompts. Additionally, we include its centroid as part of the prompt
if it is inside the component as a supplementary to the grid prompts. For all
other cases, we use centroid prompt only.
     If a connected component that meets the criteria for grid prompts has more
than 14 of the patch area, we apply grid prompts to all connected components
in the slide image instead of evaluating each one individually. This is because
neighboring melanomas often share similar shapes, even if they don’t fit a single
morphology. When a large melanoma with an irregular shape is present, nearby
melanomas usually have similar shapes, making grid prompts the most effective
for covering all components.

3.5   Final Mask Generation
After deriving the prompts, we run SAM to generate its own mask Ŷ m as shown
in Fig. 1. To obtain the final mask, we combine the post-processed Segformer’s
mask X̂ m and SAM’s mask Ŷ m by performing a union between the two:
                                   Y = \hat {Y}^m \cup \hat {X}^m             (2)
We choose to combine these two masks because single point prompts are sparse
and may not comprehensively cover all regions. This sparsity can lead to am-
biguity and result in missing some high-confidence predictions from Segformer.
Therefore, we choose to include the post-processed mask X̂ m to ensure that
high-confidence regions are kept in the final mask Y .

3.6   Training Strategy
We devise a training strategy involving two stages that optimizes SAM for the
way we use prompts. Since we only use single point prompts, we first train SAM
on single point prompts for melanoma. For each patch sampled from a microscopy
slide image, we first find all connected components and for each connected com-
ponent we generate a single point prompt clicked at a random position inside
it. This enables the model to learn to segment melanoma anywhere in a patch.
After the initial training on random point prompts, we fine-tune our model on
patches centered at each individual single point prompt. Each patch might con-
tain multiple components, but we only set the component containing the point
prompt as the target to reduce ambiguity. This allows the model to optimize for
inference using our SAM-based method.
      Adapting SAM to Melanoma Segmentation in Microscopy Slide Images         9

4     Experiments

4.1   Dataset


Our dataset comprises 101 microscopy slide images, with sizes ranging from
23700 × 21199 pixels to 1996 × 1679 pixels. These images are derived from skin
biopsies stained with H&E [10] and captured under a microscope at 40x mag-
nification. Detailed Annotations at this magnification level are provided by an
expert dermatopathologist. Each image in the dataset is carefully selected and
cropped from the original WSIs by the dermatopathologist. This is because whole
slide images often contain multiple focal planes of the same tissue, leading to
redundancy in the data. By selecting the most informative regions at a single
focal plane, we reduce the redundancy and ensure that the dataset focuses on
the most relevant tissue structures. The annotations for our microscopy images
include seven classes: air, background cells, epidermis, invasive melanoma, in-
flamed tumor, fibrotic tumor, and uncertain tumor. It is important to note that
invasive melanoma is the only type of melanoma precisely annotated. In-situ
melanoma is labeled as epidermis in our dataset due to its confinement to the
epidermis and due to our focus on segmenting invasive melanoma.
    Segformer Dataset Generation. To generate the dataset for Segformer,
We follow the approach described by Wang et al [26]. Given the extremely high
resolution of microscopy slide images, we divide each slide into non-overlapping
patches of 512×512 and 1024×1024 pixels. We re-categorize the original annota-
tions into three distinct classes: invasive melanoma, epidermis, and others. This
reclassification is essential since the ambiguous boundaries of fibrotic and in-
flamed tumor make them less suitable for effective segmentation model training.
We under-sample the background by discarding patches with 97% of background
cells and air to address class imbalance issues. The resulting dataset comprises
14885 patches of around 3.9 billion pixels for 512 × 512 resolution and 4326
patches of around 4.5 billion pixels for 1024 × 1024 resolution. This prepro-
cessing approach ensures a balanced and representative dataset for training the
Segformer model.
    SAM Dataset Generation. We generate the SAM dataset corresponding
to the two-stage training process described in Sec. 3.6. For the first stage, we
divide each microscopy image into non-overlapping patches and generate a sin-
gle point prompt within each connected component randomly. The ground truth
for each prompt is the mask corresponding solely to that particular connected
component, rather than all components in the patch. This aims to minimize
the ambiguity of single point prompts as much as possible and facilitates model
convergence. For the second stage, we use both the centroid and randomly sam-
pled points as the training prompts. We use patches centered at each prompt
to optimize SAM specifically for our method. This stage’s dataset comprises
8357 patches of 512 × 512 pixel resolution and 6170 patches of 1024 × 1024 pixel
resolution.
10     Q. Liu et al.

4.2   Implementation Details

Model Settings. We use Segformer B0 and B1 [28] as the initial segmentation
model and EfficientSAM-S [29] as the segment anything model in our approach.
We choose EfficientSAM-S since it is the most efficient variant of SAM that
reconstructs the image embeddings of ViT-H [9] in the original SAM. To further
improve training efficiency, we integrate adapters into the ViT [9] image encoder
following the approach described in Med-SA [27]. We use adapters with an input
and output dimensionality of da = 768 and set the dimensionality of hidden
layers to dh = 1024. With adapters, we only fine-tune 6.7M parameters for
EfficientSAM-S with a total of 29.3M parameters.
Training. For Segformer, we use AdamW [14] optimizer with β1 = 0.9 and
β2 = 0.999, and a weight decay of 0.01. We use an initial learning rate of 5e − 4
and a polynomial decay scheduler. We use the weights of Segformer pretrained
on ImageNet [7] as our starting point and train the model for 150 epochs. For
EfficientSAM, we use the Adam optimizer with an initial learning rate of 1e − 4,
an exponential decay rate of β1 = 0.9 and β2 = 0.999, and a weight decay of
0.05. We use the initial learning rate for the first 10 epochs and apply a learning
rate decay factor of 0.5 every 10 epochs. We use a batch size of 8 for patch
resolution 512 × 512, and a batch size of 6 for patch resolution 1024 × 1024. The
model is first trained for 100 epochs on the first-stage dataset and then trained
for 150 epochs on the second-stage dataset. The model is trained with a binary
cross entropy loss function with equal weights for the invasive melanoma and
the backgrounds. All experiments are implemented in PyTorch and executed on
4 NVIDIA Quadro RTX 8000 GPUs.
Inference. To generate the segmentation mask with Segformer, we process each
microscopy slide image into patches. Specifically, we use a sliding window to
create patches by shifting the window both horizontally and vertically with a
step size of 128 pixels. In addition, we apply a 2D Gaussian kernel as a weight-
ing mechanism for each pixel within a patch. The kernel has the same size as
the patch and a standard deviation of 41 of the patch’s side length. To gener-
ate the segmentation mask for EfficientSAM, we run our method with a fixed
set of hyperparameters. We set the threshold for determining in-situ melanoma
αm = 0.1, the probability threshold for high-confidence regions β = 0.8, and
the threshold for excluding low-confidence regions αc = 0.4. Additionally, the
threshold for the ratio between the sides of a minimum bounding box αb , as
described in Algorithm 1, is set to 3. The grid prompt employs a vertical and
horizontal gap of 64 pixels between neighboring points.


4.3   Results

To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed method, we compare it with state-
of-the-art melanoma segmentation methods on our dataset. As shown in Tab. 1,
we compare our method with melanoma segmentation methods including Multi-
Scale FCN [18], HRNet & OCR [21], HIPT [26], and Segformer [28]. The results
for Segformer B0 and B1 are reproduced following the methods described in
      Adapting SAM to Melanoma Segmentation in Microscopy Slide Images         11

Table 1: The results of invasive melanoma segmentation on our dataset. We compare
our proposed methods with other state-of-the-art segmentation methods.

                      Model              Resolution IoU (%) F1 (%)
               Multi-Scale FCN [18]         512       13.0   14.0
               HRNet & OCR [21]             788       29.1   44.0
                    HIPT [26]               512       40.1   57.3
                   Seg. B0 [28]             512       44.6   61.6
                   Seg. B1 [28]             512       42.0   59.2
         Seg. B0 & EfficientSAM-S (ours)    512       54.1   70.2
         Seg. B1 & EfficientSAM-S (ours)    512       47.5   64.4
                    HIPT [26]                1024       33.0     46.0
                   Seg. B0 [28]              1024       44.0     61.1
                   Seg. B1 [28]              1024       45.0     62.0
         Seg. B0 & EfficientSAM-S (ours)     1024       49.5     66.2
         Seg. B1 & EfficientSAM-S (ours)     1024       49.4     66.1



Wang et al [26]. All EfficientSAM methods shown in the table use a 1024 × 1024
patch size, which is different from the resolution field in Tab. 1 that represents
the side length of a patch used for the initial segmentation model.
    As shown in Tab. 1, our method outperforms all other baselines in terms of
IoU and F1 score. Compared to using solely the Segformer, which is also used as
the initial segmentation model in our method, our method achieves a gain of 9.1%
IoU and 8.2% F1 over the state-of-the-art segmentation method. Fig. 4 presents
representative qualitative results on our dataset, where our method significantly
reduces errors in in-situ melanoma regions and enhances segmentation accuracy
in areas where distinguishing between invasive melanoma and the epidermis
is particularly challenging. Additionally, the best result is achieved with using
EfficientSAM and Segformer B0 with 512 × 512 patches, even though this is not
the best performing Segformer in terms of IoU and F1 score. A higher IoU for
the initial segmentation mask does not necessarily indicate a higher improvement
in IoU in the final mask of our method. The amount of improvement depends
on the quality of sampled prompts and the room left for improvement for each
prompt.


4.4   Ablation Studies

We now analyze our method through a series of ablation studies on each com-
ponent of the framework.


In-situ Melanoma Detection We investigate the impact of in-situ melanoma
detection described in Sec. 3.2 by filtering out all detected estimated in-situ
melanoma regions regardless of their confidence levels. Tab. 2 shows that this
consistently improves performance, with IoU gains ranging from 0.5% to 11.8%.
The improvement varies based on the quality of the initial segmentation mask
12      Q. Liu et al.




        (a) Ground Truth            (b) Segformer-B0               (c) Ours

Fig. 4: Qualitative results on our dataset. Red denotes invasive melanoma and green
denotes the epidermis. Compared to Segformer, our method significantly improves the
accuracy of predictions for invasive melanoma regions, especially in areas where distin-
guishing from the epidermis is challenging.



and the room left for improvement. In contrast, disabling in-situ melanoma de-
tection results in a performance drop compared to the original mask produced by
Segformer. This drop occurs because prompts generated from incorrect predic-
tions lead SAM to make additional errors. Therefore, enabling in-situ melanoma
detection not only mitigates errors from incorrect initial predictions but also
leverages the strengths of the remaining high-confidence predictions to improve
the final segmentation results.


Low-Confidence Region Filtering We study the impact of low-confidence
region filtering presented in Sec. 3.3. As shown in Tab. 2, our method achieves a
3.9% IoU gain for Segformer B0 and a 4.6% IoU gain for Segformer B1 when using
a 1024 × 1024 patch size. However, there is a slight drop of 0.1% in IoU for Seg-
former B0 with a 512 × 512 patch size. This suggests that some high-confidence
invasive melanoma regions touch the epidermis, which are not filtered by the
algorithm, are actually in-situ melanoma. Overall, this demonstrates that low-
confidence region filtering improves the robustness of our segmentation results.
      Adapting SAM to Melanoma Segmentation in Microscopy Slide Images             13

Table 2: Ablation study on in-situ melanoma detection and low-confidence region
filtering in preparation for prompt generation, as described in Sec. 3.2 and Sec. 3.3.

      Initial            In-situ Melanoma Low-Confidence
              Resolution                                   IoU (%)
      Model                  Detection    Region Filtering
      Seg. B0     512                                        42.4
      Seg. B0     512            ✓                           54.2
      Seg. B0     512            ✓               ✓           54.1
      Seg. B0    1024                                        41.4
      Seg. B0    1024            ✓                           45.6
      Seg. B0    1024            ✓               ✓           49.5
      Seg. B1     512                                        44.1
      Seg. B1     512            ✓                           47.5
      Seg. B1     512            ✓               ✓           47.5
      Seg. B1    1024                                        44.3
      Seg. B1    1024            ✓                           44.8
      Seg. B1    1024            ✓               ✓           49.4


Prompt Types We study the effectiveness of different prompt types. We test
prompts with centroid alone, grid alone and our proposed strategy that uses both
as presented in Sec. 3.4. Tab. 3 shows that in most cases using both achieves
the highest IoU in the final mask. Compared to grid prompts alone, using both
achieves a gain as high as 3.7% IoU. Compared to centroid prompts alone, using
both achieves gains up to 2.1% IoU with one case showing no improvement.
It is noticeable that centroid prompts alone outperforms grid prompts alone in
the final mask, but performs much worse in pre-merged mask. This shows that
centroid prompts allow more accurate segmentation and thus complement the
initial mask well, achieving high IoU in the final mask after merging. In contrast,
grid prompts alone achieve full coverage over the initial mask, but not all points
serve as effective prompts for accurate segmentation. This demonstrates that
our method effectively leverages the strengths of both prompts by using grid
prompts for large, irregular melanoma components and centroid prompts for
small, regular melanoma components, maximizing the advantages of each prompt
type.

Final Mask Generation We study the impact of final mask generation. As
shown in Tab. 4, the final mask consistently achieves the highest IoU in all cases.
EfficientSAM’s mask outperforms the post-prococessed mask in most cases, with
the most significant improvement being a 5.5% increase for Segformer B0 using
512 × 512 patches. Merging two masks into a final mask significantly enhances
accuracy. The post-processed mask shows gains ranging from 2.2% to 5.5% IoU,
while the EfficientSAM’s mask gains improvements between 0.8% and 2.3%
IoU. This demonstrates that EfficientSAM compliments well the post-processsed
mask in generating the final mask. In addition, we evaluate the EfficientSAM’s
performance with prompts generated from the ground truth. Its IoU performance
is 10.8% higher than the best result of using EfficientSAM alone and 8.9% higher
14       Q. Liu et al.

Table 3: Ablation study on the effects of using different prompts. "Both" denotes
the method that dynamically uses both centroid and grid prompts based on the shape
distributions of melanoma components, as shown in Sec. 3.4.

           Initial                        EfficientSAM Final Mask
                        Prompt Resolution
      Segmentaion Model                      IoU (%)    IoU (%)
           Seg. B0      Centroid  512           43.3      53.1
           Seg. B0       Grid     512           50.6      51.7
           Seg. B0       Both     512          52.2       54.1
           Seg. B1      Centroid  512           44.3      47.5
           Seg. B1       Grid     512          46.4       46.5
           Seg. B1       Both     512           46.1      47.5
           Seg. B0      Centroid  1024          40.8      48.5
           Seg. B0       Grid     1024          45.5      45.8
           Seg. B0       Both     1024         48.7       49.5
           Seg. B1      Centroid  1024          37.7      47.3
           Seg. B1       Grid     1024          46.0      47.2
           Seg. B1       Both     1024         47.1       49.4


Table 4: Ablation study on final mask generation. The last row represents the result
when prompts are generated from the ground truth instead of the mask produced by
Segformer.

          Initial                 Post-processed EfficientSAM Final
                       Resolution
     Segmentaion Model               IoU (%)        IoU (%)  IoU (%)
          Seg. B0         512          48.6            52.2    54.1
          Seg. B1         512          43.4            46.1    47.5
          Seg. B0         1024         46.7            48.7    49.5
          Seg. B1         1024         47.2            47.1    49.4
            GT              -            -             63.0     -



than the best final mask. This demonstrates the upper limit of the performance
of our method when using fully accurate prompts.



5     Conclusion


We proposed a novel approach to explore the potential of SAM for melanoma seg-
mentation in microscopy slide images. Our method utilizes Segformer to generate
initial segmentation masks and subsequently prompts EfficientSAM using a dy-
namic selection of centroid and grid prompts for automatic invasive melanoma
segmentation. Our experimental results demonstrate that this approach sur-
passes other state-of-the-art melanoma segmentation methods by a large margin
of 9.1% in IoU.
      Adapting SAM to Melanoma Segmentation in Microscopy Slide Images              15

Acknowledgements
We would like to express our gratitude to Michael Wang and Timothy McCal-
mont for providing the data, and to Shinwoo Choi for sharing valuable insights,
without which this paper would not be possible.

References
 1. Abeloff, M.D., Armitage, J.O., Niederhuber, J.E., Kastan, M.B., McKenna, W.G.:
    Abeloff’s Clinical Oncology E-Book. Elsevier Health Sciences (2008)
 2. Alheejawi, S., Mandal, M., Xu, H., Lu, C., Berendt, R., Jha, N.: Deep learning-
    based histopathological image analysis for automated detection and staging of
    melanoma. In: Deep Learning Techniques for Biomedical and Health Informatics,
    pp. 237–265. Elsevier (2020)
 3. American Cancer Society: Cancer facts and figures 2024 (2024), https://www.
    cancer.org/research/cancer-facts-statistics/all-cancer-facts-figures/
    2024-cancer-facts-figures.html, accessed: 2024-06-08
 4. Arbelaez, P., Maire, M., Fowlkes, C., Malik, J.: Contour detection and hierarchical
    image segmentation. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelli-
    gence 33(5), 898–916 (2010)
 5. Chen, S., Ge, C., Tong, Z., Wang, J., Song, Y., Wang, J., Luo, P.: Adaptformer:
    Adapting vision transformers for scalable visual recognition. Advances in Neural
    Information Processing Systems 35, 16664–16678 (2022)
 6. Conic, R.Z., Cabrera, C.I., Khorana, A.A., Gastman, B.R.: Determination of the
    impact of melanoma surgical timing on survival using the national cancer database.
    Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology 78(1), 40–46 (2018)
 7. Deng, J., Dong, W., Socher, R., Li, L.J., Li, K., Fei-Fei, L.: Imagenet: A large-
    scale hierarchical image database. In: 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision
    and pattern recognition. pp. 248–255. Ieee (2009)
 8. Deng, R., Cui, C., Liu, Q., Yao, T., Remedios, L.W., Bao, S., Landman, B.A.,
    Wheless, L.E., Coburn, L.A., Wilson, K.T., et al.: Segment anything model (sam)
    for digital pathology: Assess zero-shot segmentation on whole slide imaging. arXiv
    preprint arXiv:2304.04155 (2023)
 9. Dosovitskiy, A., Beyer, L., Kolesnikov, A., Weissenborn, D., Zhai, X., Unterthiner,
    T., Dehghani, M., Minderer, M., Heigold, G., Gelly, S., et al.: An image is
    worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2010.11929 (2020)
10. Fischer, A.H., Jacobson, K.A., Rose, J., Zeller, R.: Hematoxylin and eosin staining
    of tissue and cell sections. Cold spring harbor protocols 2008(5), pdb–prot4986
    (2008)
11. Goodson, A.G., Grossman, D.: Strategies for early melanoma detection: Ap-
    proaches to the patient with nevi. Journal of the American Academy of Dermatol-
    ogy 60(5), 719–735 (2009)
12. Huang, Y., Yang, X., Liu, L., Zhou, H., Chang, A., Zhou, X., Chen, R., Yu, J.,
    Chen, J., Chen, C., et al.: Segment anything model for medical images? Medical
    Image Analysis 92, 103061 (2024)
13. Kirillov, A., Mintun, E., Ravi, N., Mao, H., Rolland, C., Gustafson, L., Xiao, T.,
    Whitehead, S., Berg, A.C., Lo, W.Y., et al.: Segment anything. In: Proceedings
    of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 4015–4026
    (2023)
16      Q. Liu et al.

14. Loshchilov, I., Hutter, F.: Decoupled weight decay regularization. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:1711.05101 (2017)
15. Ma, J., He, Y., Li, F., Han, L., You, C., Wang, B.: Segment anything in medical
    images. Nature Communications 15(1), 654 (2024)
16. Nofallah, S., Mokhtari, M., Wu, W., Mehta, S., Knezevich, S., May, C.J., Chang,
    O.H., Lee, A.C., Elmore, J.G., Shapiro, L.G.: Segmenting skin biopsy images with
    coarse and sparse annotations using u-net. Journal of digital imaging 35(5), 1238–
    1249 (2022)
17. Oskal, K.R., Risdal, M., Janssen, E.A., Undersrud, E.S., Gulsrud, T.O.: A u-net
    based approach to epidermal tissue segmentation in whole slide histopathological
    images. SN Applied Sciences 1, 1–12 (2019)
18. Phillips, A., Teo, I., Lang, J.: Segmentation of prognostic tissue structures in cu-
    taneous melanoma using whole slide images. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
    conference on computer vision and pattern recognition workshops (2019)
19. Roy, S., Wald, T., Koehler, G., Rokuss, M.R., Disch, N., Holzschuh, J., Zimmerer,
    D., Maier-Hein, K.H.: Sam. md: Zero-shot medical image segmentation capabilities
    of the segment anything model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05396 (2023)
20. Van de Sande, K.E., Uijlings, J.R., Gevers, T., Smeulders, A.W.: Segmentation as
    selective search for object recognition. In: 2011 international conference on com-
    puter vision. pp. 1879–1886. IEEE (2011)
21. Shah, A., Mehta, A., Wang, M., Neumann, N., Zakhor, A., McCalmont, T.: Deep
    learning segmentation of invasive melanoma. In: Medical Imaging 2023: Digital and
    Computational Pathology. vol. 12471, pp. 447–452. SPIE (2023)
22. Skin Cancer Foundation: Melanoma overview: A dangerous skin cancer (2024),
    https://www.skincancer.org/skin- cancer- information/melanoma, accessed:
    2024-06-08
23. Van Rijthoven, M., Balkenhol, M., Silin, a, K., Van Der Laak, J., Ciompi, F.:
    Hooknet: Multi-resolution convolutional neural networks for semantic segmen-
    tation in histopathology whole-slide images. Medical image analysis 68, 101890
    (2021)
24. Van Zon, M., Stathonikos, N., Blokx, W.A., Komina, S., Maas, S.L., Pluim, J.P.,
    Van Diest, P.J., Veta, M.: Segmentation and classification of melanoma and nevus
    in whole slide images. In: 2020 IEEE 17th International Symposium on Biomedical
    Imaging (ISBI). pp. 263–266. IEEE (2020)
25. Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N., Kaiser,
    Ł., Polosukhin, I.: Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information pro-
    cessing systems 30 (2017)
26. Wang, F., Wang, M., Zakhor, A., McCalmont, T.: Transformers for microscopy
    slide image segmentation of invasive melanoma. Electronic Imaging 36, 1–5 (2024)
27. Wu, J., Fu, R., Fang, H., Liu, Y., Wang, Z., Xu, Y., Jin, Y., Arbel, T.: Medical
    sam adapter: Adapting segment anything model for medical image segmentation.
    arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.12620 (2023)
28. Xie, E., Wang, W., Yu, Z., Anandkumar, A., Alvarez, J.M., Luo, P.: Segformer:
    Simple and efficient design for semantic segmentation with transformers. Advances
    in neural information processing systems 34, 12077–12090 (2021)
29. Xiong, Y., Varadarajan, B., Wu, L., Xiang, X., Xiao, F., Zhu, C., Dai, X., Wang,
    D., Sun, F., Iandola, F., et al.: Efficientsam: Leveraged masked image pretraining
    for efficient segment anything. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00863 (2023)
30. Yuan, Y., Chen, X., Wang, J.: Object-contextual representations for semantic seg-
    mentation. In: Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow,
    UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part VI 16. pp. 173–190. Springer (2020)
      Adapting SAM to Melanoma Segmentation in Microscopy Slide Images           17

31. Zhang, Y., Zhou, T., Wang, S., Liang, P., Zhang, Y., Chen, D.Z.: Input augmenta-
    tion with sam: Boosting medical image segmentation with segmentation foundation
    model. In: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-
    Assisted Intervention. pp. 129–139. Springer (2023)
32. Zhou, T., Zhang, Y., Zhou, Y., Wu, Y., Gong, C.: Can sam segment polyps? arXiv
    preprint arXiv:2304.07583 (2023)
